All right, so let's start
this section with the question why java?
Because maybe someone has asked you this question
in your past and you didn't have the best response.
So the responses to why java are the key features
which you might be tested on.
And these are, firstly,
Java is derived from C and C++ but simplified,
Java is architecture neutral,
Java is object oriented,
Java is statically typed,
Java is a dynamic programming language,
Java supports multi-threaded processing,
distributed computing is also supported by Java,
and memory management is handled by the Java environment
and not the developer.
So let's go through each of these terms.
Firstly, Java is derived from C and C++ but simplified.
So why Java?
Well, we might ask the original developers.
Java was initially started to enhance the C++ language,
which is the object oriented extension
of the C language.
C and C++ languages are compiled into machine
specific assembly language,
but Java was designed as a write once,
run anywhere language since it's initial goal
was to be deployed on multiple non-pc devices.
Java code is compiled into byte code,
which is interpreted by the Java virtual machine
and then translated to execute on the machine
it's being hosted on.
The architects of Java eliminated
more complicated features such as pointers,
operator overloading, multiple class inheritance,
and destructors.
They added garbage collection for automated
memory management and the ability
to write a multithreaded application
as well as library support for network programming.
Java is architecture neutral.
So architecture neutral is another way
of saying platform independent.
An application developer can write Java code
without knowing or caring what hardware
platform or platforms the application
will be deployed to.
Java compiles source code into Java byte code,
which is then interpreted by the Java virtual machine
using just-in-time compilation to optimise
and run the application on the target machine.
Java is object oriented.
So Java is a class based object oriented language.
From an object oriented theorist's point of view,
Java is not a pure object oriented language
since it supports some primitive data types
for optimization of performance.
Java allows precise access control of class members
supporting encapsulation of data.
So you can hide both data and implementation details
from other classes, which use or extend
the class you create.
Java supports dynamic binding
which delays the determination
of the code to be executed for
a specific method until runtime
which supports polymorphism.
Java supports both overloaded and overridden methods.
When you override a method,
you're using polymorphism,
declaring that the class has its own custom
behaviour for a particular method
or additional behaviour to its extended class
and it is this behaviour that will execute
at runtime when the object's runtime type
is fully known.
Dynamic binding is also known as late binding
or runtime binding.
Static binding is binding that can be known
at compile time and is also known
as early binding.
So Java supports both the inheritance feature
of an object oriented language,
by allowing classes to extend or be subtypes
of other classes.
So this is the "IS A" feature of object orientation.
Java also supports the composition feature
of an object oriented language,
the "HAS A" feature, by allowing class data
to be of any other defined class type.
So it is important to note that Java supports
a single inheritance class structure,
a class can only extend one class,
or only have a single parent class in its hierarchy.
So let's look at types of inheritance
and how it applies to Java.
Multiple inheritance of state,
no, Java doesn't support that.
State is inherited from a supertype
and classes can only have one supertype.
Multiple inheritance of implementation,
no, Java doesn't support that.
Here, implementation means inheriting
method definitions from a supertype
and classes in Java again can only have one supertype.
Multiple inheritance of type,
yes Java does support that.
Java allows classes to extend its type
as well as implement other types.
Java is statically typed.
Java is a statically typed language
which requires you to declare the data types
of your variables before you use them,
while dynamically typed languages do not.
Statically typed languages perform
type checking at compile time.
Dynamically typed languages are checked at runtime.
Each variable in Java must be declared with a type.
Java is considered more strongly typed than C and C++
because it eliminated pointer arithmetic,
but it is considered not as strongly typed
as some other languages, because it will perform
some implicit type conversions in order
to cut down programmer effort.
Java is a dynamic programming language.
A dynamic programming language is an extensible language
which provides the ability to add new code,
extend objects and definitions,
and modify the type system.
So we already know that Java is a statically typed language,
but it's still considered a dynamic programming language
because of the following features:
the environment is dynamically extensible,
whereby classes are loaded on the fly as required.
The language supports reflection,
which allows objects to be
queried at runtime and manipulated.
Java supports class extension and inheritance,
allowing behaviour to be altered at runtime.
And low level operations are dynamically executed
by the Java virtual machine.
Java supports multi-threaded processing.
Java does support multi threaded execution,
however it is not automatic.
From the application programmer's point of view,
you start with just one thread, called the main thread.
This thread has the ability to create additional threads
through programmatic constructs.
Distributed computing is supported by Java.
In addition to the Java virtual machine being portable
to many hardware platforms across a distributed environment,
Java has many features which support communication
across distributed systems.
Java contains extensive TCP/IP networking facilities,
library routines support protocols
such as HyperText Transfer Protocol, HTTP,
and File Transfer Protocol, FTP.
Memory management is handled by the Java environment,
and not the developer.
Java was written to take the work of memory management
out of the hands of the developer who no longer
has to write destructors to destroy
and deallocate objects.
Instead, Java provides a garbage collection mechanism.
The Oracle documentation describes
automatic garbage collection as the process
of looking at heap memory,
identifying which objects are in use and which are not,
and deleting the unused objects
which effectively means that the underlying memory
is reclaimed and reused for future object allocation.
An in use object, or a referenced object,
means that some part of your programme still
maintains a pointer or reference to that object.
You will need to know when an object is considered
no longer referenced for the exam.
In the Java platform,
there are currently four supported
garbage collection alternatives
and all but one of them, the serial collector,
execute the work in parallel
to improve performance.
And I'm going to be discussing garbage collection
in a later video.
For 24-7 applications, or applications which
manipulate large data sets,
Java's garbage collection could have a detrimental effect
on an application's performance
since garbage collection could tie up
much needed resources while it's executing.
In these environments, you may need to get more familiar
with the different types of garbage collectors available
in the Java virtual machine to tune
the right collector for your type
of application environment.
Finally, I just want to discuss some
brief points about the Java environment.
The Java Development Kit, JDK,
includes the development tools,
the compiler, the debugger,
class inspector, and documentation generator,
as well as the Java runtime environment
to run applications.
The Java Runtime Environment, JRE,
includes only the class libraries and executables
required to run a Java programme.
A Java application does not need the JDK to run.
Java is write once run anywhere, that's WORA,
which means it's platform independent
and portable Java source code is compiled into
Java bytecode class files
which are then interpreted by the Java Virtual Machine,
JVM, which is available for
a diverse range of platforms.
The JVM interacts with the operating system
interpreting the class files
and performing just in time compilation
to specific machine code, optimising the code
for the environment that the code is executing on.
A Java programme never really executes natively
on the host machine as such.
All right, so next I'm going to present
you with a couple of quiz questions
that tests some of the material we've just covered
in this video, and then we're going to move on
to section three, working with Java primitive
data types and string APIs.
See you in the next video.